# Fishing displacement project 
## Project description
This project assesses the risks for fishing displacement from a Hypothetical highly protected marine area (HypHPMA), providing a standardised method for assessing displacement that is applicable to other areas of closure. The analyses uses VMS/I-VMS (Inshore Vessel Monitoring System) data, which provides positional data on fishing vessels and landing/logbook data, which gives information on vessel catch weight, value and species caught. The analysis is broken down into a socio-economic section- assessing the number of fishing vessels at risk from displacement and the catch weight and value they could potentially lose due to closure. The environmental section looks at the swept area ratio of the hypothetical HPMA and surrounding areas to assess fishing intensity, as well as linking fishing pings (locations of fishing vessels) to environmental data to look at benthic habitat type, sensitivity, blue carbon and fish hotspots that vessels are fishing over. 
### The key aims for the code are to:
- Clean logbook/landings and VMS/IVMS data, formatting them into a suitable layout for the R package VMStools.
- Assign speeds for when a vessel is fishing using functions from the package VMStools
- Merge logbook/landings and VMS/IVMS data, so that vessel catch weight and values are linked to location.
- Carry out a Socio-economic and environmental analysis for a hypothetical area of closure.
- Plot heatmaps of the catch-weight, value, time spent fishing and effot (kWh) for the area of closure and surrounding areas.
- Calculate swept area ratio based on gear type and swept sensitivity ratio, depending on habitat type for the environmental analysis. Plotting heatmaps based on the results.
- Link VMS/IVMS data to environmental data including the blue carbon habitat map, essential fish habitat map, the Natural England Marine Evidence Base Broadscale Habitat Map and the Natural England Spatial Seabed Sensitivity Tool. In order to identify sensitive areas where fishing activity may be occurring.
- Predict where fishing vessels may be displaced to with respect to the closure, indentifying areas where fishing actvity/effort may increase.
Each of these steps are clearly outlined within the R markdown document: Displacement_markdown
Processing scripts
The Rmarkdown script was developed using Version 4.2.2 of R, the main package used by this script is VMStools Version 0.77 which can be downloaded from: https://github.com/nielshintzen/vmstools/releases/. The full list of packages used can be found in packages.R within the functions folder.
## Data
The project uses VMS/IVMS data, which gives the lat, long, speed and heading of fishing vessels, alongside the vessel reference collected from vessel monitoring systems. We are also using landings/logbook data, which gives the weight, value and species a fishing vessel has caught, alongside the gear type, vessel power, vessel reference, fishing trip reference and other information about the vessel. Both of IVMS/VMS and landings datasets were requested from the Marine Management Organisation (MMO), under the Environmental Information Regulations 2004 and the Freedom of Information Act 2000, the data is from 2019. IVMS/VMS data is collected from vessel monitoring systems onboard the vessel which is sent to the MMO's datahub. Landings datasets are collected from the logbooks of fishers. Example VMS (tacsat) and landings (eflalo) datasets are available within the VMStools package.
For the environmental datasets benthic habitats were identified using the Natural England Marine Evidence Base Broadscale Habitat Map (NE MEB BSH), a spatial database comprised of the UK combined habitat map and Natural England data (v. 2024). The environmental analysis also used the Natural England Spatial Seabed Sensitivity Tool (NESSST), (v. 2023); a map that spatially presents the sensitivity of benthic habitats to standardised pressures caused by human activities, this is also undergoing licensing. The blue carbon habitat was identified using the inshore layer generated from the Blue Carbon Natural England Research Report (Swaile et al., 2022). This identifies important marine and coastal habitats for carbon storage and sequestration. Habitats include kelp, saltmarsh, seagrass, oyster beds, subtidal and intertidal sand and mud. The Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) map (project MMO1133) was used to identify adult, juvenile and spawning hotspots (Katara et al., 2021) within the study area.
## Copyright and Licence
The Fishing Displacement Project is published by Natural England under the MIT Licence. Please refer to the LICENCE file supplied within the repository for full copyright and licence details.
## Ethics statement
Natural England have completed and submitted the UK Statistics Authority Ethics Self-Assessment Tool for this project. No major ethical considerations were identified. A copy of the completed Self-Assessment form is provided within the documentation.
## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank David Warwick from Seafish for his assistance on assigning gear widths depending on vessel size and métier, for swept area ratio calculations. Thank you to the D&S IFCA Team for their insight into fishing activity and VMS/I-VMS and logbook data. Thank you to everyone that reviewed the code internally and externally.
## Useful references
For more information on the VMStools package used in the analysis, please refer to the paper: Hintzen, N.T., Bastardie, F., Beare, D., Piet, G.J., Ulrich, C., Deporte, N., Egekvist, J. and Degel, H., 2012. VMStools: open-source software for the processing, analysis and visualisation of fisheries logbook and VMS data. Fisheries Research, 115, pp.31-43.
Or the Wiki: https://github.com/nielshintzen/vmstools/wiki 
## Contact information
For further information, or if you have any issues or queries with the code or documentation, please contact the repository manager Laura Reeves (laura.reeves@naturalengland.org.uk) or alternative contact Lucy Smibert (lucy.smibert@naturalengland.org.uk).
